docs: expand typescript integration to cover .d.ts generation (#22)
wixplosives/stylable.io: docs/getting-started/typescript-integration.md

---
id: typescript-integration
title: TypeScript Integration
---

> Using Stylable requires you to import `*.st.css` stylesheets into your `*.ts/*.tsx` files to apply any class name, state, variable or keyframe to your components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stylable requires `*.st.css` stylesheets to be imported into your `*.ts/*.tsx` files for class names, states, variables, or keyframes to be applied to your components.
```

> Using Stylable requires you to import `*.st.css` stylesheets into your `*.jsx/*.tsx` files to apply any class name, state, variable or keyframe to your components.

Author: you can still get a better IDE experience even if working in a JS file

> Using Stylable requires you to import `*.st.css` stylesheets into your `*.jsx/*.tsx` files to apply any class name, state, variable or keyframe to your components.

Reviewer 2: agreed, but the page is about typescript and working in a normal `js` file doesn't require this step

> By default, TypeScript has no way of knowing what the content of any `*.st.css` file holds, and so you must define a type for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, TypeScript has no way of knowing what a `*.st.css` file contains, and so you must define a type for it.
```

> Below, we describe two **complementing** ways of doing so.

Reviewer: What does "complementing" mean in this case - the two methods work together?

Author: That's the intent, yeah

## 1. Declaring global stylesheet typings

> The first type definition you should include in your project, is a general purpose `*.st.css` global declaration which would provide a broad signature of a Stylable stylesheet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first type definition you should include in your project is a general purpose `*.st.css` global declaration. This provides a broad signature of a Stylable stylesheet.
```

> The first type definition you should include in your project, is a general purpose `*.st.css` global definition which would remove any TypeScript errors and allow Stylable stylesheets to be used without any special validations or completions.

Reviewer 2: it is a general definition, but "without any special validation or completions" is not accurate. Maybe something like: "general purpose `*.st.css` global definition which would provide a broad signature of a Stylable stylesheet"

Author: agreed

> To do this, create a `globals.d.ts` file in your `./src` directory and add the following declaration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, create a `globals.d.ts` file in your `./src` directory and add the following declaration:
```

```ts
// globals.d.ts
declare module "*.st.css" {
  export * from "@stylable/runtime/stylesheet";

>   const defaultExport: unknown;

Reviewer 2: why doesn't the default export defined in `@stylable/runtime/stylesheet`?

Author: don't think you can do a transient default export like that

  export default defaultExport;
}
```

## 2. Generating stylesheet definition files

> Stylable provides the ability to generate type definition files (`.d.ts`) for any stylesheet. These serve as static typings for each export that the stylesheet provides:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stylable provides the ability to generate type definition files (`.d.ts`) for any stylesheet. These serve as static typings for each export that the stylesheet provides.
```

- `class`/`var`/`stVar`/`keyframe` - exposes available symbols defined within the stylesheet
- `st`/`style`/`cssStates` - exposes stylesheet utility functions typed according to states defined within stylesheet

These files are generated by using our `@stylable/cli`:

```sh
stc --dts
```

:::note
If you are consuming stylesheets that do not have `.d.ts` files, the global type definition will serve as a fallback type.
:::

### Generating source-maps

> In addition to generating `.d.ts` files, you can also generate source-maps (`.d.ts.map`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to generating `.d.ts` files, you can also generate source-maps (`.d.ts.map`). These will map the content of the `.d.ts` file back to the source stylesheet (`.st.css`) so that you can jump to definitions in your stylesheets straight from your TypeScript files.
```

> These source-maps will map the content of the `.d.ts` file back to the source stylesheet (`.st.css`) so that you can jump to definitions in your stylesheets straight from your TypeScript files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> These source-maps will map the content of the `.d.ts` file back to the source stylesheet (`.st.css`) so that you can jump to definitions in your stylesheets straight from your component `.jsx/.tsx`.

Reviewer 2: I think generalizing "component `.jsx/.tsx` files" would be more correct: `Typescript files` or `javascript files`, it's not all components

```sh

> stc --dts --dtsSourceMap

Reviewer 2: `--dtsSourceMap` is not usable without the `--dts` flag, right? maybe a comment on that (or a warning when running the flag alone in the cli)

Author: The CLI will be mad at you if you try just that one

Reviewer 2: mad as in uncatched error? :)

Author: build in dependency warning mechanism from yargs

```

### Development mode

> To have a good experience when working locally in dev mode, we recommend generating both the definition files and their source-maps using our `watch` service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To have a good experience when working locally in dev mode, we recommend generating both the definition files and their source-maps using our `watch` service to ensure that your code, validations, completions, and other language-service capabilities will remain up-to-date as you are working.
```

> This ensures that as you are working your code, validations, completions and other language-service capabilities will remain up-to-date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> This ensures that as you are working your code validations, completions and other language-service capabilities will remain correct.

Reviewer 2: `correct`, maybe `up to date`?

Author: agreed

```sh
stc --dts --dtsSourceMap -w --cjs false
```

:::tip

> Generating both definition and source-map files for every stylesheet in your project can make the project seem more cluttered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generating both definition and source-map files for every stylesheet in a project can clutter the project up. For this reason, we recommend adding the generated `*.st.css.d.ts` and `*.st.css.d.ts.map` files to your `.gitignore` file, and only include them in your published packages.
```

> To help ease this, we recommend adding the generated `*.st.css.d.ts` and `*.st.css.d.ts.map` files to your `.gitignore` file and only including them in your published packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> To help ease this, we recommend adding the generated `*.st.css.d.ts` and `*.st.css.d.ts.map` files to your `.gitignore` file and only including them in your published packages.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a small section in the getting started for recommended additions for `.gitignore` to contain all the things Stylable recommends with comments so users can easily copy. you can then backlink to places like this.

Author: We don't really have any other things to ignore, so these are pretty much tied to the TS integration

:::

### Publishing

> If you publish any `*.st.css` in your package, you should also publish the `.d.ts` and `.d.ts.map` files alongside them. This will result in a better experience for users consuming your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you publish any `*.st.css` files in your package, you should also publish the `.d.ts` and `.d.ts.map` files alongside them. This practice leads to a better experience for users consuming your project.
```

```sh
stc --outDir="dist" --stcss --dts --dtsSourceMap
```

> ### ESlint Stylable plugin vs. generated definition files

Reviewer 2: no ESLint integration page to link to?

Author: We never fully documented it because the behavior was meh.

Reviewer 2: fair enough, although now we talk about it here, I don't say this should be part of this change, but maybe we should add something about it with a proper disclaimer?

> There is an overlap of functionality between the Stylable ESlint plugin and the generated `.d.ts` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is an overlap of functionality between the Stylable ESlint plugin and the generated `.d.ts` files - both solutions validate stylesheet export usages. The `.d.ts` file approach is superior, howevever, as it offers better validations, completions and correctness. All it requires is that the `watch` service be running.
```

> Both of these solutions will validate stylesheet export usages. However the `.d.ts` file approach is probably the better one. It offers better validations, completions and correctness. It does require the `watch` service to be running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> So, if you are generating definition files, you can remove the ESlint Stylable plugin and suffer no degredation in development experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In conclusion, if you are generating definition files, you can remove the ESlint Stylable plugin and suffer no degredation in development experience.
```
